Using Pybricks on Linux 

 Laurens Valk 

 Let’s build, code, and learn! 

 Follow 

 Website 

 Facebook 

 GitHub 

 Instagram 

 YouTube 

 Custom Social Profile Link

-->

 Using Pybricks on Linux

 You can  create programs  on
Windows 10 or 11, macOS, Linux, Android, or ChromeOS. This page covers the
additional configuration you’ll need to use Pybricks effectively on Linux. 

 The Pybricks developers use Linux daily, so we definitely wanted to make sure
this works well! 

 Choosing an editor or browser 

 The simplest way to get started is to use the web-based Pybricks Code editor at
 code.pybricks.com . You
can also use  your preferred local editor . 

 If you use the web-based interface, we recommend using Chromium. You can
install it using your preferred package manager. On Ubuntu for example, you
can do: 

 sudo snap install chromium

 Google Chrome works as well. Other Chromium-based web-browser may or may not
support Web Bluetooth. Notably, Opera, Vivaldi and Brave do not support Web
Bluetooth. 

 Web Bluetooth is not officially supported on Linux and requires Experimental
Web Platform features to be enabled. Copy and paste the following in the
address bar, set it to  Enabled  and restart the browser. 

 chrome://flags/#enable-experimental-web-platform-features

 If you use Chromium as a snap package, you may get an error when you try to
install the firmware on a SPIKE Prime, SPIKE Essential, or MINDSTORMS Robot
Inventor hub via USB. To resolve this, enable access to USB devices: 

 sudo snap connect chromium:raw-usb

 Adding udev rules on Linux 

 This step is only needed for LEGO hubs with USB, such as SPIKE Prime, SPIKE
Essential, and MINDSTORMS Robot Inventor. 

 By default, Linux does not allow the use of unknown USB devices, so you need to
add  udev  rules for your hubs. Pybricks provides a couple of ways to do this. 

 If you are using an Ubuntu-based Linux distro, you can install the
 pbrick-rules  package from the Pybricks PPA. This method has the advantage of
automatic updates. 

 Copy code 

 sudo add-apt-repository --update ppa:pybricks/ppa
sudo apt install pbrick-rules

 You can alternately install the rules using the  pybricksdev  command line tool: 

 Copy code 

 pipx run pybricksdev udev | sudo tee /etc/udev/rules.d/99-pybricksdev.rules

 If neither of these options is suitable, you can manually copy  this
file 
to  /etc/udev/rules.d/99-pybricksdev.rules . 

 After installing the  udev  rules, disconnect any affected devices and plug them back in. 
If this doesn’t seem to work, try rebooting. 

 Facebook  

 LinkedIn  

 You May Also Enjoy 

 Groceries with machine learning

 A LEGO SPIKE Prime robot goes shopping. Find the broccoli with machine learning.

 Robotic arm with vision

 A LEGO SPIKE Prime robotic arm with a camera to detect colored objects to pick up.

 Saving LEGO® MINDSTORMS® …

 Pybricks reboots LEGO® MINDSTORMS® for use in the modern classroom. Help us save hundreds of thousands of robots from the e-waste pile!

 Using Pybricks with Visual Studio Code and other editors

 You can use Pybricks in your favorite code editor like Visual Studio Code. Here’s how.
