Robotic arm with vision - Pybricks 

 Laurens Valk 

 Let’s build, code, and learn! 

 Follow 

 Website 

 Facebook 

 GitHub 

 Instagram 

 YouTube 

 Custom Social Profile Link

-->

 Robotic arm with vision

 What will you build when your robots can see? 

 This project is a fun demo of our new
smart sensor functionality. Your phone
detects the position and size of a bright colored object, so your robot can
find it and pick it up. 

 How does it work? 

 This project extends the basic demos from
the  smart sensor introduction guide ,
so be sure to try those first. Those examples use a single loop to process the
received values and act on them, but this doesn’t always work well in bigger projects. 

 Instead, you can use a background task to process and unpack the sensor
values into your variables. Then your main program can use the variables when
needed, as shown below. 

 Download block code project 

 This program has two tasks. One keeps unpacking the received sensor
values into variables. The other task finds the object by rotating the robot
base until the object is in the right position to be picked up.

 The main task can access the received values by just reading the variables. Here
the base keeps turning until your phone sees a colored object that is big
enough ( width &gt; 8 ) and in the expected position ( 70 &lt; x &lt; 80 ) for pickup. 

 This program also shows how you can adjust the color that the phone should try
to detect. With the default red color ( hue=0 ), the magenta beams would
sometimes be mistaken for red. By choosing a higher hue as the reference
( hue=8 ), we look for colors that are slightly more orange than magenta.
This reduces the false positives, and the red object we’re looking for is still
well within range. 

 You can see the result in the video below. 

 Facebook  

 LinkedIn  

 You May Also Enjoy 

 Groceries with machine learning

 A LEGO SPIKE Prime robot goes shopping. Find the broccoli with machine learning.

 Saving LEGO® MINDSTORMS® …

 Pybricks reboots LEGO® MINDSTORMS® for use in the modern classroom. Help us save hundreds of thousands of robots from the e-waste pile!

 Using Pybricks with Visual Studio Code and other editors

 You can use Pybricks in your favorite code editor like Visual Studio Code. Here’s how.

 Using Pybricks on Linux

 Tips and tricks for using Pybricks successfully on Linux. With udev rules and snap configurations for Chromium.
