uselect – Wait for events &mdash; pybricks v3.6.1 documentation
      
      
      
      
    
  
    
  
  
        
        
        
        
        
        
    
    
    
    
    
    

 
  
    

    

      
        
          
  
      
      uselect – Wait for events
      
      
  
  

          
           
             
  

        
            
                
                    
                        
        
        ❌
        
        
        
        ✅
        
        
        
        ✅
        
        
        
        ✅
        
        
        
        ✅
        
        
        
        ✅
        
        
                    
                
            
        
        

uselect – Wait for events¶
This module provides functions to efficiently wait for events on multiple streams.
Poll instance and class

poll() &#x2192; Poll¶
Creates an instance of the Poll class.

Returns:
The Poll instance.

class Poll¶

register(object, eventmask=POLLOUT | POLLOUT)¶
Register a stream object for polling. The stream object will now be
monitored for events. If an event happens, it becomes part of the
return value of poll().
If this method is called again for the same stream object, the object
will not be registered again, but the eventmask flags will be
updated, as if calling modify().

Parameters:

object (FileIO) – Stream to be registered for polling.
eventmask (int) – Which events to use. Should be POLLIN,
POLLOUT, or their logical disjunction: POLLIN | POLLOUT.

unregister(poll)¶
Unregister an object from polling.

Parameters:
object (FileIO) – Stream to be unregistered from polling.

modify(object, eventmask)¶
Modifies the event mask for the stream object.

Parameters:

object (FileIO) – Stream to be registered for polling.
eventmask (int) – Which events to use.

Raises:
OSError – If the object is not registered. The error is ENOENT.

poll(timeout=- 1) &#x2192; List[Tuple[FileIO, int]]¶
Wait until at least one of the registered objects has a new event or
exceptional condition ready to be handled.

Parameters:
timeout (int) – Timeout in milliseconds. Choose 0 to return
immediately or choose -1 to wait indefinitely.

Returns:
A list of tuples. There is one (object, eventmask, …)
tuple for each object with an event, or no tuples if there are no
events to be handled. The eventmask value
is a combination of poll flags to indicate what happened. This may
include POLLERR and POLLHUP even if they were not registered.

ipoll(timeout=- 1, flags=1) &#x2192; Iterator[Tuple[FileIO, int]]¶
First, just like poll(), wait until at least one of the registered
objects has a new event or exceptional condition ready to be handled.
But instead of a list, this method returns an iterator for improved
efficiency. The iterator yields one (object, eventmask, …)
tuple at a time, and overwrites it when yielding the next value. If you
need the values later, make sure to copy them explicitly.

Parameters:

timeout (int) – Timeout in milliseconds. Choose 0 to return
immediately or choose -1 to wait indefinitely.
flags (int) – If set to 1, one-shot behavior for events is
employed. This means that streams for which events happened
will have their event masks automatically reset using
poll.modify(obj, 0). This way, new events for such a stream
won’t be processed until a new mask is set with modify(),
which is useful for asynchronous I/O schedulers.

Event mask flags

POLLIN: int¶
Data is available for reading.

POLLOUT: int¶
More data can be written.

POLLERR: int¶
Error condition happened on the associated stream. Should be handled explicitly
or else further invocations of poll() may return right away.

POLLHUP: int¶
Hang up happened on the associated stream. Should be handled explicitly
or else further invocations of poll() may return right away.

Examples¶
See the projects website for a demo that uses this module.