URL: https://pybricks.com/learn/sensors/measuring-sensor-values/
Title: learn_sensors_measuring-sensor-values.txt
================================================================================

Measuring sensor values - Pybricks

  
  

  

  
  

  

    

  

  
    

    

  
    
      
    
  

    
      

  

  
  
  
    
      
      
      
      
    
    
      

    
  
  
  

  
    
    
    
    

    
      
        
      

      
        
          
        
        Robots can’t actually see or feel the way humans do, but by adding sensors to
them, they can collect and report information about the environment around
them. LEGO robots come with a variety of sensors to measure distance, color, light
intensity, motion, and applied force.

Your programs can interpret sensor information in ways that will make
your robot seem to respond to its environment, as if it is experiencing it. For
example, you can make your robot drive and turn around if it sees an obstacle.

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Sensor
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Hub with built-in
motion sensors

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Buttons work
like sensors

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Motor
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        The robot operates
in its environment.

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Your program makes the
motors respond to what
sensors measure.

    
    
    
    
    

Sensors give robots a sense of their environment.

In this section, you’ll learn how to measure and report sensor values. Knowing
what each sensor measures is essential for building robots that can reliably
react to their environment.

We’ll use Inventor Bot with the SPIKE Ultrasonic
Sensor to measure distance in the
following examples. This is a good way to practice with sensors because you can
easily see what is going on. Once you’ve mastered the essentials with this
sensor, you’ll be better prepared to apply the same techniques to the color
sensor in the next chapter.

You can also follow along
with other sensors
that measure distance. If you don’t have any sensors, you can still measure the
motor angle, as you’ll see later in this chapter.

Challenge #5.1.A: Robot sensations ⸺ Create a table of human senses. For
each sense, describe what you can sense and how you sense it. Which of these
senses are available to your robot? Which sensors can be used to measure them?
Consider not just the sensors that you can plug in but also the sensors built
into the hub. Research ⸺ Download the specifications for the SPIKE
Color Sensor.
Search the web to find specifications for the other sensors and the hub.
To find them, use search keywords from the Color Sensor data sheet. Determine
what each sensor measures and fill in your table with senses. For each value,
write down which units the values are reported in and how fast you can measure
them.

Measuring sensor values

Let’s start with a program to measure distance values.
Create a new program and add the Ultrasonic Sensor Setup block. Then
create a loop that prints sensor values repeatedly by following these steps:

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Setup blocks
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Ultrasonic Sensor Setup block
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Configure all your
sensors in the setup

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Repeatedly print
two text values.

    
    
    
    
    
    

1. Create a new program and configure your sensor on the right port. Add a Conditional Repeat block, a Print block and a Wait Time block to print repeatedly. This will print Distance: abc four times per second. You'll add the actual sensor value in the next step.

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Measure Distance block

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        If you set up multiple sensors
that measure distance, pick the
right one here.

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Each time your program gets here,
this block measures the distance
and passes it to the Print block.

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Measured distance
values in mm.

    
    
    
    

2. From the Input blocks tab, choose the Measure Distance block and drop it into the second value in the Print block. Now it will print the measured distance instead of the text abc.

When you run the program, you should see a continuous stream of values in the
output pane. Move the robot around to see the values change. If values aren’t
coming in or appear delayed, make sure the output pane is scrolled all the way
down. It should then continue to scroll down on its own.

Notice that the Measure Distance block has a rounded shape, unlike any of the
notched, rectangular blocks you’ve used so far. Any block that provides a
value has such a rounded shape. It does not do anything on its own, but
it passes its value to the block that you place it in. In this example, the
distance value was passed to the Print block. The underlying value (abc) is
ignored and the passed value (a number for distance) is used instead.

Challenge #5.1.B: Blind spots ⸺ The Ultrasonic Sensor measures the distance
to other objects by emitting an inaudible sound and measuring how long it takes
for the echo to return. What is the nearest and farthest distance that you
can measure? Begin by pointing the sensor at a solid surface
like a wall or door. What does it report when it doesn’t detect anything at
all? Discuss ⸺ What is the impact of different materials or the size and
shape of objects? Prepare a list of everyday objects such as walls, curtains,
glass windows, pencils, coffee mugs, or clothing. For each object, predict how
well the sensor will detect it. Discuss how well it will work up close or far
away, pointing straight at it or at an angle. Verify your hypotheses by
observing the measured values.

Challenge #5.1.C: Measure and share ⸺ The technique to display sensor
values works with any sensor. You’ll learn to use all sensors in the coming
chapters, but you can already explore what they measure now. Create programs
similar to the one above, but set up different sensors. Presentation ⸺ Each
team member explores one sensor in detail. If a sensor can measure more than one
thing, coordinate the extra work with your team. For each sensor,
create a short demonstration and take turns presenting your findings. What can your
sensor measure? How accurate is it? Try it under various conditions, such
as in the dark or outside. Is there anything that surprised you?

Recording sensor values

Displaying sensor values as you just did is a good way to gauge how well the
sensor works as you place it in different positions. To get a
better picture of what the robot sees during a mission, you can record
measurements for some time and analyze the recording afterward.

Create the following program to record distance values for
5 seconds. It is similar to your previous program, but it adds a Stopwatch
Setup block (from the Setup tab) and a Measure Time block (from the Input tab)
to display the elapsed time alongside the distance measurement. Note that the
Print block is configured to display a comma (,) between printed values.

    
        Download block code project
    

    
        
    
    
    
    Recording the distance measurement for 5 seconds.
    
    

Run the program and move the robot around. The output pane gradually fills up
with 50 pairs of time (in milliseconds) and distance (mm) values. The Wait Time
block waits 100 ms between measurements, so the entire program runs in about 50
× 100 ms = 5000 ms, or five seconds.

You can display the measured data in a
graph to better see how the robot was moved. From the following graph, you can
see that the robot started about 320 mm from the wall. Then it was moved
farther back for two seconds and then towards the wall again at the end
of the experiment.

    
    
        

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 0
 500
 1000
 1500
 2000
 2500
 3000
 3500
 4000
 4500
 5000
 0
 100
 200
 300
 400
 500
 600
 700
 800
 Time (ms)
 Distance (mm)

      
    
    

Recording of the distance measurement displayed in a graph.

Making your own graphs (optional)

By recording data, you can verify that your program or mission works as you
intended. For example, you could record color
sensor values and verify that a motor stops moving when it sees a black line.

Making your own graphs is optional. You can skip this section if you are short
on time for your competition. Otherwise, it can be a great addition to your
presentation or innovation project. It’s also a really useful skill to learn
beyond robotics.

The following steps show how to create a graph of the data you just recorded. 
You can use your favorite spreadsheet app if you already have one.
We’ll use LibreOffice here. It is
free and can be installed on most computers.

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        1. Right-click the output pane.
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        2. Select all data.
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        3. Copy the data.
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        4. Clear data before next experiment.
    
    
    
    
    
    

1. Copy the recorded measurements.

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        1. Attempt to paste
in the first cell

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        2. Data is separated by a comma.
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        3. Preview the result.
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        4. Click OK.
    
    
    
    

2. Paste the data into a new spreadsheet and indicate separation by comma. This creates a column for time and a column for the distance. (If you use a different app that doesn't prompt you for this automatically, choose Data > Text to Columns in your app to achieve the same. If that doesn't work, paste it into a plain text file first, and import that file into your spreadsheet.)

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        1. Select
first column.

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        2. Shift and click
to select second
column.

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        3. Insert
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        4. Chart...
    
    
    
    

3. Select the columns and begin inserting a chart. These steps should be similar in most spreadsheet apps. You may be able to go here directly by clicking on a chart icon.

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        1. Create an XY chart
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        2. Lines only.
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        3. Finish.
    
    
    
    
    
    

4. Configure the chart. Choose XY (Scatter) or similar. Select 'Lines Only'.

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        X-axis with time in ms.
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Y-axis with
distance in mm.

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        The robot was moved away
from the wall and back again.

    
    
    
    

5. The end result. You can add additional labels for the X and Y axes for clarity.

Challenge #5.1.D: Where did the time go? ⸺ In the experiment above, the
measurements are spaced almost exactly 100 ms apart. This might give you the
impression that measuring and printing values takes no time at all. Actually,
it only appears that way because 100 ms is plenty of time to send a few numbers
to your computer in the background without holding up your program. If you
print more text more quickly, you will see it start to impact
the time. To see this, try reducing the wait time to 1 ms. Click the > icon
on the Print block to add another value and make it print something like
“looooooong text”. Analyze the time between the measurements. What is the
smallest and biggest gap? Are the time differences constant or do they change a
lot? Discuss ⸺ Could you have done the original experiment with the 100 ms
pause without the stopwatch block? Why is it still better to keep it?

Recording movement  (optional)

Most LEGO motors have a built-in sensor that measures the traveled angle.
The drive base uses this information to figure out how far it has traveled. You
can read these measurements with the Drive Base Measure block from the Input tab.
This can be used to record information about how your robot moves, as shown in
the following example.

    
        Download block code project
    

    
        
    
    
    
    Recording movement. This uses the Multitask block to drive and record
values at the same time. It is configured to run until one task completes
so that data recording stops when the experiments ends.
    
    

As before, this program produces comma-separated data points that you can
copy to a spreadsheet editor if you want to make your own graph. The result
is similar to the following graph.

    
    
        

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 0
 500
 1000
 1500
 2000
 2500
 3000
 3500
 4000
 4500
 -300
 -200
 -100
 0
 100
 200
 300
 
 
 Distance (mm)
 Speed (mm/s)
 Time (ms)

      
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Maximum position (250 mm).
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Top speed.
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        500 ms
pause.

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Negative speed
means reverse.

    
    
    
    
    
    

Distance and speed recording when driving the robot back and forth using the program shown above. Even if you hadn't seen it move, you can determine much of what it did by carefully looking at the graph.

Challenge #5.1.E: Ramp it up ⸺ Add two Drive Base Configuration blocks
to your program to choose a new drive speed and acceleration. Verify that it
reaches your configured top speed at the given acceleration. To verify the
acceleration, take the change in speed and divide it by the time it took to get
to top speed. You can determine this from the printed values or using a graph
similar to the one above.

Challenge #5.1.G: Where am I? ⸺ Create a program that records the
Ultrasonic Sensor distance measurement as the robot turns around, as shown
below. Place the robot in a corner and run the experiment. Create a graph with
the robot angle on the x-axis and the sensor distance on the y-axis. An example
result is given below. Based on the graph alone, can you determine the
distances to the walls? What about the starting angle with respect to the
walls? Discuss ⸺ Some data points appear to be missing (they are not behind
the picture). Where are they? If you squint, you can almost see two line
segments that dip down in the middle. Compare the angles of both dips. How far
are they apart, and why? Why does a line graph not work in this case? Some
angles appear to have multiple clearly distinct distance values. What does this
overlap mean? Why does this occur just in between the two dips mentioned above?
Why is it useful to show the robot angle on the x-axis instead of the time
like we did so far?

    
    
        

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 0
 30
 60
 90
 120
 150
 180
 210
 240
 270
 300
 330
 360
 200
 250
 300
 350
 400
 450
 500
 Robot rotation angle (°)
 Ultrasonic  sensor  measurement (mm)
??

      
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Starting orientation
    
    
    
    

Graph for Challenge #5.1.G: A recording of the ultrasonic sensor measurement as the robot makes several full rotations. Based on this data, can you figure out where the robot is placed relative to the walls?

    
        Download block code project
    

    
        
    
    
    
    The program for Challenge #5.1.G records the Ultrasonic Sensor distance
while the robot turns around.
    
    

Challenge #5.1.H: Hitting a wall ⸺ Now it is your turn to design and
implement an experiment to determine the robot’s position. This time, have the
robot drive in a square parallel to the walls of a corner, as shown below. You
decide which values to record and plot in a graph. For example, you might
record the Ultrasonic Sensor distance or drive base angle. For this experiment,
choose time for the X-axis.  Discuss ⸺ Before you run your experiment,
sketch what you think the graphs will look like. Assume that you start in
corner A and that Q is 250 mm and R is 500 mm. Run the experiment and verify
your prediction. Next, run the experiment from starting position B, C, or D.
Based on the data, ask your teammates where they think the robot started.

    
    
        

  
  
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      
    
  
  
    
    
    
    
    B
    C
    D
    A
    
    
    Q
    R
  

      
    
    

Overview for Challenge #5.1.H: Record data while driving in a square to determine where the robot started relative to the walls.
