URL: https://pybricks.com/learn/getting-started/pybricks-environment/
Title: learn_getting-started_pybricks-environment.txt
================================================================================

Creating and running Pybricks programs

  
  

  

  
  

  

    

  

  
    

    

  
    
      
    
  

    
      

  

  
  
  
    
      
      
      
      
    
    
      

    
  
  
  

  
    
    
    
    

    
      
        
      

      
        
          
        
        Now that your hub is up and running with Pybricks, let’s have a look around the
Pybricks app before diving into all the blocks.

In this section, you’ll learn how to create, run, and back up programs. You’ll
also learn how turn the hub on and off, and start programs when you’re away
from your computer.

Exploring the app

Previously, you’ve visited the tools menu to install the firmware. You can
also open the file manager as shown below. The programs you create can
be opened from here.

At the top, you’ll find buttons to interact with the hub. Once connected,
several buttons to start and stop your program will be enabled. If a program
produces any text output, it will be shown in the output window at the bottom.

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        File manager
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Your programs
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Output window
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Open/close documentation
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Hub connection
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Account
    
    
    
    
    
    

The Pybricks app with the file menu, output window, and documentation opened up. All can be closed to save space on the main coding canvas.

Using the documentation

The guide you’re reading now explains how you can use many of the
available blocks. It also tells you why you might want to use them,
and in which situation.

But sometimes you just want to quickly look up what a particular block or
setting does. That’s where the documentation comes in. You can open and close
it using the book icon on the right hand side of the app. If you use
block-based coding, just right-click on any block and choose help to jump to
the relevant page.

Checking your account status

Click the user icon to check your account status, as shown above. Here you can
sign in to access block coding. You can access block coding by becoming a
Patreon supporter or purchasing a license code. You can find the details
here.

Creating your first program

Let’s start by creating a very simple program that prints some text to your
computer screen. To begin, open the file menu
and start creating a new program using the + icon, as shown below. Choose
block coding, enter a program name, and click Create.

As you type a program name, you’ll get suggestions in case the name can’t be
used. In that case, click Fix it for me to adjust it automatically.

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        1. Files
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        2. New program
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        3. Block coding
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        (Python)
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        4. Choose a name
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        5. Create
    
    
    
    
    
    

You can create a new program on the files tab using the + icon. Then you can choose for block coding or Python, and choose a file name.

Your new program contains a few blocks already. There’s a yellow Setup and
Start block, as well as a blue Print block. We’ll get to the details of these
in the next chapters. For now, just move some of the blocks around to
get a feel for how this works.

If you’re here to test your system prior to getting access to Pybricks block
coding, you can run the default program without adding any
blocks. Skip to the next 
section to
learn how to run it. You’ll see Hello, Pybricks! in the output pane.

Next, open the Flow blocks tab and select the Wait Time block. Place it on the
canvas and adjust the wait time as shown below. Also be sure to close the
file menu to free up space on the screen.

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Flow
blocks

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Close file menu to free up space
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        1. Select the Wait Time block
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        2. Attach here
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        3. Change duration
    
    
    
    
    
    

Pick the Wait Time block from the Flow category and drag it towards the blue Print block that is already there, such that the snap together. Then change the duration of the wait by clicking on it and typing a new number.

Next, pick the Print block from the Output tab and attach it to the stack
of blocks you’ve built already, as shown below.

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Output
blocks

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        1. Select the Print block
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        2. Attach and change text
    
    
    
    
    
    

Pick the Print block from the Output category and attach it to the existing blocks. Change the printed text as you like.

Congratulations, you’ve just created your first program! It should:

  Print Hello, Pybricks! to the output pane of the app.
  Wait 5 seconds.
  Print Have a nice day!

Connecting to the hub

You’ll now learn to connect to the hub so you can verify that your program
works. Turn on the hub. It should blink a blue light, which means
it is ready to connect. Click the Bluetooth button as shown below, choose
your hub and click Pair.

If you haven’t already done so, install the Pybricks firmware
first, as discussed in the previous section.

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        1. Bluetooth
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        2. Choose hub
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        3. Pair
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        4. Hub status (visible after connecting)
    
    
    

Turn your hub on. Click the Bluetooth button in the app, choose your hub, and click pair.

Once connected, you can check the hub status at the bottom of your screen.
You’ll see the hub name and version. If your hub battery is low, you’ll see it
there as well.

Starting and stopping programs

Now that the hub is connected, click the play (▶) button to start your
program. Small programs like these run almost right away.

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Disconnect
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Run
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Stop
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Interactive Python (REPL)
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Appears right away
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Appears after 5 seconds
    
    
    
    
    
    

You can start or stop your program with the buttons at the top.

You should now see the result at the bottom of your screen.
You can unfold or increase the size using the handle in the center as needed.

The program starts with the Hello, Pybricks! message. Then it waits for 5
seconds, and prints the Have a nice day! message. The end result is:

Hello, Pybricks!
Have a nice day!

If you run it again, it adds the same output another time. To clear any output,
right-click on the text and choose Clear.

If a program is running, you can stop it with the ⏹-button. To try this out,
start the program again and press stop right away. The output will be:

Hello, Pybricks!
The program was stopped (SystemExit).

This is because it printed the first message right away, but you stopped it
before the second message would print after 5 seconds.

Note ⸺ A Pybricks program ends when the last block completes. Movement
and sound stops. In Scratch, it keeps running even after all blocks complete.

Start programs with the hub button

Once you’ve run your program once, you don’t need your computer to run it
again! Just press the hub (center) button to start it, even when you’re
disconnected from the computer.

The program you’ve just made doesn’t do much, but you can still tell that it’s
running from the slowly fading blue status light, as shown in the table below.

Press the (center) button again to stop a program if it is running. This works
no matter how you started it.

To turn the hub off, hold the (center) button for three seconds. If the hub is
not connected and no program is running, it will shut down after a few minutes
of inactivity.

Note ⸺ Programs are saved persistently during shutdown. If you pull the
hub batteries before shutting down normally, your program won’t be saved.

You can tell whether a program is running by looking at the status light.
This table shows a
rectangular light, but the round light of the Prime Hub or Inventor hub
blinks the same way.

  
    
       
      Pattern
      Description
    
  
  
    
      
      Blinking blue
      Program is not running. Ready to connect.
    
    
      
      Solid blue
      Program is not running. Connected.
    
    
      
      Fading blue
      Program is running. (Either with or without a connection, it looks the same.)
    
  

You’ll see the following indications less often, but it’s still useful to know
what they mean. If you change the light color in your program, you’ll still
see the orange on top of your own color to remind you to charge the battery.

  
    
       
      Pattern
      Description
    
  
  
    
      
      Blinking orange
      Low battery.
    
  
  
    
      
      Blinking or steady purple
      Ready to enter update mode.
    
    
      
      Red, green, and blue blinks
      Update mode active.
    
  

The coding canvas

As you made your first program, you might have come across several buttons
on the coding canvas, as shown below. Anywhere on the canvas, you can zoom the
blocks in or out by scrolling with your mouse or by pinch a touch screen.

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Scroll or pinch to zoom
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Generated Python code
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Download screenshot
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Toggle documentation
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Toggle generated code
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Align blocks vertically
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Zoom blocks to fit
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Deleted blocks
    
    
    

The buttons on the coding canvas. To zoom, scroll your mouse or pinch the touch screen.

From top to bottom, you’ll find:

  Download screenshot: This is useful to share or present your work
conveniently, even if your code is too big for a conventional screenshot.
  Toggle documentation: You can open the documentation to browse the block
reference or close it for more space.
  Toggle Python code: You can see the Python code being generated live as you
move blocks around.
  Align blocks: As your code grows, this can help you conveniently align your
code in a single column.
  Zoom to fit: Helps you keep the overview of a large program.
  Trashcan: You’ll find deleted blocks here. You can take the blocks out
if you change your mind. The trash is emptied when you load a new program
or switch tabs.

You can close the Python code if you don’t need it. Note that you can’t edit
the generated code yourself, since you would lose your changes every time you
moved a block. Instead you can copy the code to a new Python program and
adjust it there as you like.

Copying and deleting blocks

You can select a block by clicking or tapping on it. Hold shift and click
additional blocks to select more. You can also hold shift to encircle a larger
group of blocks, as shown below.

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Hold shift, then drag
to create a selection.

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Right-click or
tap and hold

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Copy or delete
    
    
    
    
    
    

Comments help you document your work. When you review your code later, you'll be able to see how it works and why you made it that way.

You can copy a selection via the right-click context menu, or use familiar
keyboard shortcuts such as ctrl+c
and ctrl+v.

Use Delete to delete selected of blocks. Alternatively, drag them
back onto the block palette or into the trash can. If you change your mind,
click on the trashcan to see deleted blocks.
Note that the trash will be emptied when you close your program or switch to
a different program.

Use the familiar shortcuts ctrl+z (or similar) to undo
changes you’ve made.

Managing program files

You can find your block programs and Python programs on the files tab. Hover
over any program to see options to rename, duplicate, back up or delete
a file, as shown below.

The files are stored within your own browser and can be used offline. They will
be deleted if you delete your browser data.

As with any digital project, it is a
good idea to occasionally back them up to a place where you can easily find
them. For convenience, you can also back up or restore all programs at once,
using the buttons at the top.

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Delete
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Rename
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Back up to your computer
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Duplicate
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Back up all programs
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Create new program
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        Import program(s) from your computer
    
    
    
    
    
    

Hover over a program file to rename it, duplicate it, or back it up. You can also back up all programs at once, or import programs you've previously backed up.

Further exploration

In this section, you’ve learned how to create and run basic programs for your
robot. It’s a good idea to play around with the code editor some more before
diving into the details of all the blocks you can use. These challenges will
help you get started.

Challenge #1.3.A: Countdown clock ⸺ Can you modify the example program to count
down from 10 to 0? Hint: You’ll need 11 Wait Time blocks and 11 print blocks.
You could type the numbers directly, or write your own notes such as “Time is up!”

Challenge #1.3.B: Twinkle Twinkle Star ⸺ Can you expand the program you’ve just
created to display the lyrics of Twinkle Twinkle Star? Look up the lyrics and
use a Print block for each line. Ensure the timing between each line is just
right by setting the time in the Wait Time blocks as required.

Challenge #1.3.C: Timing the Wait Time block ⸺ The Wait Time block lets you
specify a time to wait in milliseconds. But is it accurate? It never hurts to
verify if a robot is really doing what you tell it to. Use print statements and
a stopwatch on your phone to determine how well it works.

Challenge #1.3.D: File management ⸺ You can back up one program, or all
programs at once as a ZIP archive. Can you download this ZIP archive, and open
it with Pybricks on another computer? You could send it by email or save it
to a service like Dropbox.

Challenge #1.3.E: Python calculator ⸺ Even though we won’t be working with
Python for a while, there’s a few things you can explore already. Click the
>>> key at the top to start the interactive prompt. In the output window
at the bottom, try typing 5+5 and press enter. Do you get the expected
result? You can also try other expressions such as 5 * 4 * 3. Use the stop
button to exit this prompt.
